# Masters Thesis Enhancing Understanding of Arbovirus Competence through Machine Learning and Feature Analysis.
This project introduced me to SHAP (SHapley Additive ExPlanations) and how it can be used to gain useful insights into large biological datasets. Code was written in python and can be found attached as well as the thesis itself. A short explanation of what was accomplished can be found below:
I analysed four large datasets containing mosquito and arbovirus experimental data to identify which features influenced arbovirus competence the most. Three target features were identified, all of each contribute to mosquito arbovirus competence (infection of the mosquito, dissemination and transmission), with a separate dataset made for each. Three classes were engineered for each target feature: a 0% class (no competence), 1-49% class (low competence) and 50-100% class (high competence). Feature selection was performed based on domain knowledge, missing data proportions for each feature, and feature redundancy.
Five machine learning models were run using each dataset; the best performing model was selected based on highest Mathew’s Correlation Coefficient, with its hyperparameters optimised. Standard deviation was calculated for the five cross-validation folds to ensure the model wasn’t overfitting in training and generalising well. Using SHAP feature analysis with the optimised model, I identified the 20 most influential features for each class in all datasets (infection, dissemination and transmission) to understand which features contributed the most for each class, as well as how they contributed (positive or negative contribution) using SHAP summary plots. Identifying and understanding these key features can influence development of mitigation strategies for arboviral disease control.
